docs: EXPOSED-747 Add a get started tutorial for Exposed DAO (#2556)
JetBrains/Exposed: documentation-website/Writerside/topics/Get-started-with-Exposed-DAO.md

- `Task` extends `IntEntity`, which is a base class for entities with an `Int`-based primary key.
- The `EntityID<Int>` parameter represents the primary key of the database row this entity maps to.
- The `companion object` extends `IntEntityClass<Task>`, linking the entity class to the `Tasks` table.
- Each property (`title`, `description`, and `isCompleted`) is delegated to its corresponding column in the `Tasks`
table using Kotlin's `by` keyword.

## Create and query a table

With Exposed’s DAO API, you can interact with your database using a type-safe, object-oriented syntax similar to
working with regular Kotlin classes. Before executing any database operations, you must run them inside a `transaction`.

<include from="Getting-Started-with-Exposed.topic" element-id="transaction-definition"/>

Open your **App.kt** file and add the following transaction function:

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="1-2,4-11,16-33,41-42"}

First, you create the tasks table using the `SchemaUtils.create()` method. The `SchemaUtils` object holds utility 
methods for creating, altering, and dropping database objects.

> Once the table has been created, you use the `IntEntity` extension method `.new()` to add two new `Task` records:

Reviewer: Semantics, but might need to change the wording of this to avoid users nit-picking:

`new()` is technically an `IntEntityClass` method (same for `find()` and `all()`). But they can be called on an `IntEntity` class only thanks to the inclusion of the companion object. Which is why they could not be called on an actual `IntEntity` instance, like `task1.find()` wouldn't compile.

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-symbol="task1,task2"}

Within the `new` block, you set the values for each column. Exposed will translate the functions into the following

> SQL queries:

Reviewer: Could we also make a short mention of the type of `task1` and `task2` being an actual instance of the `IntEntity` class that was defined? Something like what's done [in the docs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/exposed/dao-crud-operations.html#create)

database. For this, you need to add a logger.

## Enable logging

At the beginning of your `transaction` block, add the following to enable SQL query logging:

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="3,7,11-14,41"}

## Run the application

<include from="lib.topic" element-id="intellij_idea_start_application"/>

The application will start in the **Run** tool window at the bottom of the IDE. There you will be able to see the SQL
logs along with the printed results:

```generic
SQL: SELECT SETTING_VALUE FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.SETTINGS WHERE SETTING_NAME = 'MODE'
SQL: CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS TASKS (ID INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY, "name" VARCHAR(128) NOT NULL, DESCRIPTION VARCHAR(128) NOT NULL, COMPLETED BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE NOT NULL)
SQL: INSERT INTO TASKS ("name", DESCRIPTION, COMPLETED) VALUES ('Learn Exposed DAO', 'Follow the DAO tutorial', FALSE)
SQL: INSERT INTO TASKS ("name", DESCRIPTION, COMPLETED) VALUES ('Read The Hobbit', 'Read chapter one', TRUE)
Created new tasks with ids 1 and 2
Completed tasks:

> SQL: SELECT TASKS.ID, TASKS."name", TASKS.DESCRIPTION, TASKS.COMPLETED FROM TASKS WHERE TASKS.COMPLETED = TRUE

Reviewer: Based on the code in `App`, the output will actually be different.
Calling `Task.find()` returns a value of type `SizedIterable<Task>`, so when `SizedIterable.count()` is called after, the final SQL that gets sent is something like : `SELECT COUNT(*) ...`.

If the SQL above is the output we do want, then we'd have to chain `Task.find { ... }.toList()` instead to return a value of `List<Task>`.

Depending on how much detail you want to get into this tutorial, I'd suggest the second option. Otherwise, it'd be prudent to add a note about what exactly the return type of `find()` is.

```

## Update and delete a task

> Let’s extend the app’s functionality by updating and deleting the same task.

Reviewer: Example below updates and deletes different tasks

<procedure>
<step>

In the same `transaction()` function, add the following code to your implementation:

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="11,13-15,34-41"}

You update the value of a property just as you would with any property in a Kotlin class:

```kotlin
```

> {src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="35"}

Reviewer: I think it's good to keep this tutorial basic, so this is the only section I'd recommend adding a tad more complexity to.
I'd suggest switching the update to something like this:
```kt
// ...
task1.title = "Try Exposed DAO"
task1.isCompleted = true
println("Updated task1: $task1")
// ...
```
Particularly because the output below will still show only a single generated SQL, emphasising that Exposed caches the changes made to the entity instance and waits until the ideal moment to actually send the (final) changes together to the database:
```
SQL: UPDATE TASKS SET COMPLETED=TRUE, "name"='Try Exposed DAO' WHERE ID = 1
```

Which could be a natural lead to adding a small note section (like [this one in the docs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/exposed/dao-crud-operations.html#update)).

Similarly, to delete a task, you use the `.delete()` method on the entity:

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="39"}

</step>
<step>
<include from="lib.topic" element-id="intellij_idea_restart_application"/>

You should now see the following result:

```generic
SQL: SELECT SETTING_VALUE FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.SETTINGS WHERE SETTING_NAME = 'MODE'
SQL: CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS TASKS (ID INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY, "name" VARCHAR(128) NOT NULL, DESCRIPTION VARCHAR(128) NOT NULL, COMPLETED BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE NOT NULL)
SQL: INSERT INTO TASKS ("name", DESCRIPTION, COMPLETED) VALUES ('Learn Exposed DAO', 'Follow the DAO tutorial', FALSE)
SQL: INSERT INTO TASKS ("name", DESCRIPTION, COMPLETED) VALUES ('Read The Hobbit', 'Read chapter one', TRUE)
Created new tasks with ids 1 and 2
SQL: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM TASKS WHERE TASKS.COMPLETED = TRUE
Completed tasks: 1
SQL: SELECT TASKS.ID, TASKS."name", TASKS.DESCRIPTION, TASKS.COMPLETED FROM TASKS WHERE TASKS.COMPLETED = TRUE
Task(id=2, title=Read The Hobbit, completed=true)

> Updated task1: Task(id=1, title=Learn Exposed DAO, completed=true)

Reviewer: The output for an entity won't look this clean unless we define it ourselves. Since we're not using a data class, an override could just be added, like:
```kt
class Task(id: EntityID<Int>) : IntEntity(id) {
    // ...
    override fun toString(): String {
        return "Task(id=$id, title=$title, completed=$isCompleted)"
    }
}
```

# Get started with Exposed's DAO API

<show-structure for="chapter,procedure" depth="2"/>
<tldr>
    <var name="example_name" value="get-started-with-exposed-dao"/>
    <include from="lib.topic" element-id="code_example"/>
</tldr>

<web-summary>
    In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to create and query a table in Kotlin with Exposed's DAO API.
</web-summary>
<link-summary>
    Learn how to create and query tables in Kotlin with Exposed's DAO API.
</link-summary>

In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to use Exposed’s Data Access Object (DAO) API to store and retrieve data in a
relational database by building a simple console application.

By the end of this tutorial, you’ll be able to do the following:

- Configure a database connection using an in-memory database.
- Define database tables and corresponding DAO entities.
- Perform basic CRUD (Create, Read, Update, and Delete) operations using object-oriented style.

<include from="Get-Started-with-Exposed.topic" element-id="prerequisites"/>
<var name="project_name" value="exposed-dao-kotlin-app"/>
<include from="Get-Started-with-Exposed.topic" element-id="create-new-project"/>

## Add dependencies

<procedure>

> Before you start using Exposed, you need to provide dependencies to your project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before you start using Exposed, you need to add dependencies to your project.
```

<step>

> Navigate to the **gradle/libs.versions.toml** file and define the Exposed and H2 version and libraries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Navigate to the **gradle/libs.versions.toml** file and define the Exposed and H2 versions and artifacts:
```

exposed-dao = { module = "org.jetbrains.exposed:exposed-dao", version.ref = "exposed" }
exposed-jdbc = { module = "org.jetbrains.exposed:exposed-jdbc", version.ref = "exposed" }
h2 = { module = "com.h2database:h2", version.ref = "h2" }
```

- The `exposed-core` module provides the foundational components and abstractions needed to work with databases in a
type-safe manner and includes the DSL API.
- The `exposed-dao` module allows you to work with the Data Access Object (DAO) API.
- The `exposed-jdbc` module is an extension of the <code>exposed-core</code> module that adds support for Java 
Database Connectivity (JDBC).

</step>
<step>

Navigate to the **app/build.gradle.kts** file and add the Exposed and H2 database modules into the `dependencies` block:

```kotlin
dependencies {
    //...
    implementation(libs.exposed.core)
    implementation(libs.exposed.dao)
    implementation(libs.exposed.jdbc)
    implementation(libs.h2)
    //...
}
```
</step>
<step>
    <include from="lib.topic" element-id="intellij_idea_load_gradle_changes"/>
</step>
</procedure>

## Configure a database connection

> Every database access using Exposed is started by obtaining a connection and creating a transaction.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't say "access is started", maybe something like "Every time you access a database using Exposed, you start by..."

To configure the database connection, use the `Database.connect()` function.

<include from="Get-Started-with-Exposed.topic" element-id="config-db-connection-procedure"/>

With this, you've added Exposed to your Kotlin project and configured a database connection.
You're now ready to define your data model and engage with the database using Exposed's DAO API.

## Define a table object

Exposed's DAO API provides the base `IdTable` class and its subclasses to define tables that use a standard `id` column
as the primary key.
To define the table object, follow the steps below.

<procedure id="define-table-object-procedure">
<step>

In the **app/src/main/kotlin/org/example/** folder, create a new **Task.kt** file.

</step>
<step>

Open **Task.kt** and add the following table definition:

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/Task.kt" include-lines="1-2,5,8,10-14"}

In the `IntIdTable` constructor, passing the name `tasks` configures a custom
name for the table. If you don't provide a name, Exposed will derive it from the object name, which may lead to
unexpected results depending on naming conventions.

> The `Tasks` object defines three columns:

Reviewer 2: It's safer to avoid using exact numbers in this context :) to save ourselves some maintenance down the road, when a column is added and there is no easy way to track if we referred to the number of columns anywhere.

You update the value of a property just as you would with any property in a Kotlin class:

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="35-36"}

Similarly, to delete a task, you use the `.delete()` method on the entity:

```kotlin
```
{src="get-started-with-exposed-dao/src/main/kotlin/org/example/App.kt" include-lines="40"}

</step>
<step>
<include from="lib.topic" element-id="intellij_idea_restart_application"/>

You should now see the following result:

```generic
SQL: SELECT SETTING_VALUE FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.SETTINGS WHERE SETTING_NAME = 'MODE'
SQL: CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS TASKS (ID INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY, "name" VARCHAR(128) NOT NULL, DESCRIPTION VARCHAR(128) NOT NULL, COMPLETED BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE NOT NULL)
SQL: INSERT INTO TASKS ("name", DESCRIPTION, COMPLETED) VALUES ('Learn Exposed DAO', 'Follow the DAO tutorial', FALSE)
SQL: INSERT INTO TASKS ("name", DESCRIPTION, COMPLETED) VALUES ('Read The Hobbit', 'Read chapter one', TRUE)
Created new tasks with ids 1 and 2
SQL: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM TASKS WHERE TASKS.COMPLETED = TRUE

> Completed tasks: 1

Reviewer: Line 250 ' SELECT COUNT(*)...' needs to be changed to match line 209 above.
